---
layout: post
title: Applied Blockchain chooses Porto as its Development Centre for European Expansion
image: porto-european-expansion
category: press-release
dlc: true
headline: Applied Blockchain, one of the UK’s leading developers of distributed ledger technology and smart contracts, has announced the opening of an office in Porto – its first non-UK office – to further strengthen its blockchain development and to fulfill the growing demand from clients internationally.
---

<p class="post__content">Set up in 2015, Applied Blockchain supports leading organisations across multiple sectors including aviation, banking, telecoms, automotive and manufacturing, as these companies evolve their businesses in order to make the best-use of blockchain technology. Applied Blockchain has over 30 startup and enterprise clients including Shell, who also recently invested in the company.</p>
<p class="post__content">“The opening of our new office in Porto and having an on-the-ground presence in continental Europe is the next natural step in the development of Applied Blockchain, and indicative of our ambition for, and commitment to, growth. It is also reflective of the increased demand we have seen for our expertise in the distributed ledger market, as we continue to deliver high-quality application solutions and products across a variety of sectors,” said Adi Ben-Ari, Founder & CEO at Applied Blockchain.</p>
<p class="post__content">“Although Portugal is a relatively new face in the global technology landscape, it has quickly risen as one of the world’s leading hubs for nurturing a high-quality pool of business and technology graduates. As a result, its developer community is blossoming,” said Adi Ben-Ari.</p>
<p class="post__content">Applied Blockchain has already recruited for its new development centre and continues to expand its talent pool. The Porto office is well positioned to access top talent across technology and different business areas.</p>
<p class="post__content">“We are very excited to be part of the dynamic and exciting tech community that is developing in Portugal. We believe Portugal offers Applied Blockchain the best opportunity to develop our business and tap into a world-leading group of skilled and ambitious talent who can match our own business and quality aspirations.”</p>
<p class="post__content">Ricardo Valente, Porto City Councillor for Economy, Tourism and Commerce, said: “Porto is an emerging hub for technology firms. Applied Blockchain’s decision to invest in the city is a recognition of our talent, strategic location, quality of life, and cost competitiveness. The city council, through InvestPorto, will continue its commitment to supporting companies such as Applied Blockchain by providing tailor-made information and assistance at different phases of the investment process.”</p>
<p class="post__content body--bold">To apply and/or express your interest of working with Applied Blockchain, please send your CV to <a href="mailto:careers@appliedblockchain.com">careers@appliedblockchain.com</a></p>